{:title "Tom's Philosophy Of Project Management For Software Development"
 :main-image {:uri "/images/posts/tech-path.jpg"}
 :category :software-processes}

Below is an excerpt from _Tom's Expectations For Project Management_ --- a
private document written for engineers who report to me and who are running
projects in a technical lead role, which lists out a set of project management
responsibilities and expectations.

<!--more-->

----

I want to include a bit of an explanation about how I view project management.
Hopefully this is useful context, and helps to make sense of the rest of this
document.

A project is any deliverable that takes longer than about a week.

Software projects are dangerous. Smaller, individual bits of work like tweaks
and fixes can't really fail, but projects can, and often do. The last 60 years
or so of the software industry have taught us that it's actually quite difficult
to run large software projects successfully. The consequences of failure range
from slightly inconvenient to disastrous — affecting customers, the business,
and the careers of everyone involved. Thankfully, software projects fail in
somewhat predictable ways, which can be mitigated.

Most software projects are inherently highly uncertain, especially so at the
beginning. The only way to achieve certainty is to release to production and
observe the results. Uncertainty means risk, and so risk management is very
important. Risk management is the most important aspect of software project
management.

The ineffectiveness of waterfall-style project management tells us that no
amount of up-front planning can guarantee success. In fact, heavy up-front
planning is a predictor of failure. Due to the inherent uncertainty of software
projects, the safest and most effective form of project management is an
iterative one, where work is prioritised by its potential to reduce risk. This
usually involves seeking feedback early and often, and continually adjusting the
plan based on that feedback.

The definition of project success is social: if the stakeholders think it's a
success, then it is. Yes, there are objective measures of success, but those
measures only matter if a someone cares about them. Put another way, if a
project is successful based on objective measures but most stakeholders consider
it a failure, then the project is a failure (and vice versa). Stakeholder
communication is the second most important aspect of software project
management. It could be the most important, but stakeholder management can be
seen as a form of risk management, so risk management wins.

And hey, sometimes projects fail even when you do everything right. I like to
frame them as "bets" because sometimes you win and sometimes you lose, but
results are not random --- typically, smart bets lead to good outcomes and
foolish bets lead to tragedy. What matters is that we make the best decisions we
can with the information that we have, and give it the best chance of success.

Failure isn't necessarily a bad thing. If we fail fast, fail cheap, fail safe,
and learn something useful in the process, that is also good project management.
If the stakeholders are thankful for a fast failure that avoids a major
disaster, that's actually a success.

For engineers, project management is overhead. Every minute spent managing a
project is a minute that wasn't spent building the project. That's not to say
that it's unimportant — it's super important — but every project management
activity needs to provide real value, otherwise it's just waste. And I hate
waste. I hate engineers being dragged into useless meetings, being distracted
from what they do best. The goal is to run as *lean* as possible — to run the
project effectively with the minimal amount of project management overhead.
Small projects need hardly any project management, and the bigger the project
the more it needs.

People do their best work when given autonomy, and that includes the choice of
how to manage the projects they are leading. The best decisions are made by the
people closest to the work, and so tech leads should be empowered to decide the
best way to run their projects. However, autonomy always comes with
responsibility — if you make the decisions then you also bear the consequences
of those decisions. My primary goal for this document is to be clear about what
you are responsible for as an autonomous tech lead for a project, not to dictate
how your projects should be run. Recommendations provided in this document are
just that: recommendations. You are free to ignore any and all recommendations
so long as you're able to meet your responsibilities some other way.
