{:title "Milestones As Talking Points"
 :main-image {:uri "/images/posts/milestones.jpg"}
 :tags [:bleet]
 :category :software-processes}

Recently someone said to me "stakeholders only care about milestones," and
something clicked for me.

<!--more-->

Engineers work at a level of granularity that is too small for stakeholders to
care about. People aren't going to read git commit history, and don't want to be
notified about every PR that gets merged.

But stakeholders _do_ care about getting status updates. Very rarely will you be
told that you can go dark, work in isolation, and just let everyone know when
the project is finished.

So how do you give status updates that stakeholders want, without being too
granular? Milestones. You map out the small set of big steps that will happen
along the way to being finished. This might not be a particularly interesting
revelation. Milestones or epics, or whatever you want to call them, are hardly a
new idea. 

I've always had a mild distain for milestones. Often they're an arbitrary grab
bag of tasks with no logical grouping or purpose. I was recently a victim of a
project that was broken into two phases. Phase 1 took 80% of the budget and was
made up of all the easiest, lowest-risk changes. Then an attempt was made to
rush out phase 2 at breakneck speed, which contained the gnarliest problems and
potentially catastrophic risks, due soley to the imminent loss of budget. This
is the kind of thing I've come to expect in regard to milestones.

But what clicked for me recently is that milestones aren't really about breaking
down projects --- they are a tool specifically designed for stakeholder
communication. If I think of milestones not as arbitrary divisions of a project,
and instead as talking points for status updates, that shift in framing gives me
something I can use. It gives me criteria for evaluating what makes a good
milestone vs a bad milestone, and another lens on how to craft good project
status updates. Now that I can see a clear purpose for them, maybe milestones
aren't that bad after all.
