{:title "Kissing Up And Punching Down — Authoritarianism In The Workplace"
 :draft true
 :main-image {:uri "/images/posts/XXXXXX.jpg"
              :artist {:name "Person McPerson"
                       :url "https://unsplash.com/photos/a-black-and-white-photo-of-a-large-ship-sSBZcdyCzxs"}}
 :tags [:management]}

When you think of an authoritarian, you might think of an older guy in a
communist military uniform doing horrible things to citizens as the leader of a
country. But authoritarianism is not limited to just the guy at the top (or
communists). It takes a whole bunch of supporters, themselves all
authoritarians, to allow that guy at the top to exist. Authoritarianism is a
worldview or set of beliefs that many people hold, and it exists in every
society.

In this article I'll be looking at authoritarianism in the context of a company.
I will starting with a definition of the core belief, then how that belief leads
to predictable behaviours, and then finishing with the outcomes that the
behaviours produce.

<!--more-->

## Definition

For the purposes of this article, I'm going to define authoritarianism as:

> The worldview or belief that a person's role or social position grants them
> the power and the moral right to control people in lower roles or social
> positions.

Importantly, this is not just something that people apply to themselves, but to
others as well. The belief is that roles confer power and rights _in
general_, regardless of whether you are on the giving or the receiving end, and
that's the way it should be. It's a worldview.

Worldviews are not conscious decisions. They are fundamental unconscious
assumptions about reality and how the world works. It's not that people have
_chosen_ what to beleive, it's more of a default that they have never examined
and it has never occurred to them that the world could be any other way. It is
the way that it is.

Also importantly, there is a moral aspect to having this power. Exercising
power over people in lower positions _is not wrong_ --- it's the nature of
reality. Conversely, disobedience towards superiors _is_ wrong, because it
defies the natural order of the world and does not respect the moral right to
control others granted by the role or social position. Proper obedience is seen
as a _moral good_, and a societal expectation.

Holding the above-defined authoritarian worldview results in predicatable
behaviour: kissing up and punching down.


## Behavioural Mode One: Kissing Up

Authoritarians switch into "kissing up" mode when interacting with superiors.
This may sound counterintuitive if your mental picture of an authoritarian is a
nasty communist dictator.

Kissing up to superiors is natural behaviour for people who hold the
authoritarian worldview. If you believe that someone is above you, holds the
moral right to control you, and that good people are obedient to their
superiors, then the only real way to look out for yourself is to fawn, flatter,
and try to gain their favour. If your boss says jump, then you're not a good
employee unless you ask how high, let them know what a great idea this jumping
business was, and that you're thankful for the opportunity.

And if the superior holds the same authoritarian worldview, then this works
well. Kissing up from subordinates acknowledges and affirms that their position
holds power over people, which lines up nicely with the way they see themselves
and the world. Authoritarians prefer the people underneath them to also be
authoritarians.

The quid pro quo of kissing up is that the superior is expected to give
preference or special treatment to the kisser upperer. The unspoken agreement
is: obedience will be rewarded later.


## Behavioural Mode Two: Punching Down

Authoritarians switch into "punching down" mode when interacting with
subordinates.

If you believe that you hold the moral right to control someone else, and that
only a bad person would disobey, then that naturally leads to a set of
behaviours I'm going to call "punching down". This is the communist dictator
stuff.

In the context of a workplace, the most common punching down behaviour is just
giving commands in a disrespectful or inhumane way. Transparency, reasoning,
consent, autonomy --- none of these are important when you feel you have the
moral right to control someone. In fact, a subordinate asking for those things
is the opposite of kissing up: it disregards and challenges the existance of the
boss's power, which contradicts the way they see themselves and how they believe
the world works.

I think punching down behaviour often comes from a thought process something
like this:

> I have been good. I've done what my boss has told me to do, even if I didn't
> want to, so it's only right and fair that I get to do the same to my
> subordinates.



## TODO

- punching down: how you treat inferiors
    - expect obedience, punish disagreement and questions
    - transparency, reasoning, role clarity, consent, are all irrelevant
    - listening is irrelvant, except as a demand for information
    - feedback is disrespect
    - good person because you _could_ destroy the subordinate but you've decided
      not to (at least not too much)
- ethics can not exist for authoritarians, it directly contradicts the belief
    - different ethical standards for superiors and subordinates
    - convderted into question: do I feel hate? no, so i'm ethical.
    - HR's role is to protect from consequences of punching down
    - belief in superiors power to control means must follow what superior says
    - follow blindly, disagreement and questions are disrespectful
        - no such thing as objective ethics
- authoritarianism is viral and anti diversity. filters out different opinions
    - diverts organisational resources to friends and allies. nepotism
    - culture fit, red flags, "performance" all geared at filtering for
      obedience
    - authoritarians pick other authoritarians, filter out the rest
- end state
    - ethics are whatever your leader says it is
    - no listening, and feedback is punished
    - disagreement and questioning is punished
    - role clarity is left deliberately ambiguous
    - secretive decision making, no reasoning or paper trail
    - resources are diverted towards most obedient people, not best workers
    - escalation of problems doesn't work because of dual nature
    - everyone ends up believing in authoritarianism


    - contrast: role has purpose and responsibilities, to achieve a greater goal
